## BIP70 payment requests `?r=` field supports `file://` URIs, allowing attacker to trick victim machine to `open()` arbitrary file

### Impact

In BIP70 payment requests, Electrum allows the `?r=` field to contain
`file://` URIs (besides http(s)).  The `?r=` field can contain an
arbitrary `file` URI, chosen by an attacker.

A malicious merchant can provide a BIP70 payment request in the form
of a QR code or text, which the victim user would then scan or
copy-paste, as part of the payment flow. Electrum would then see
the `file` URI, and try to open the file in read mode and read it.
If the read succeeds, the data is parsed using protobuf.

Specifically regarding the QR code vector, note that Electrum starts
the BIP70 flow as soon as a QR code is scanned, without giving a
chance to the user to review the content of the decoded QR code.

The `file` URI support was originally added for local dev testing,
with the implicit assumption that it is safe to open files on the
local filesystem in read-only mode. This assumption is incorrect.

On Linux/macOS, e.g. trying to read `/dev/zero` results in a DOS
attack, where the application would run out-of-memory and get killed.

On Windows, paths can be crafted that correspond to network requests,
for example initiating an SMB connection. In particular, it seems that
it might be possible for an attacker located in the same "trusted"
Local Area Network as the victim, after getting the victim to scan
a malicious QR code, to have the victim's computer initiate a same-LAN
SMB connection to the attacker's computer, and to capture an
authentication token. That authentication token could later be used
to initiate an offline brute-force attack against the user's Windows
account password.

### Patches

We have removed the `file` URI support in commit
[b247aa5ffef0f9ef000772fcf9cd9c7141abded8](https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum/commit/b247aa5ffef0f9ef000772fcf9cd9c7141abded8).
Electrum version 4.2.2 contains the fix.

### Credits

We thank the Unciphered team, and specifically Frank Davidson
`<fd@unciphered.com>` for responsibly disclosing this issue to us.

### Affected versions

Electrum 2.1<=x<4.2.2

### Known as

- [GHSA-4fh4-hx35-r355](https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum/security/advisories/GHSA-4fh4-hx35-r355)

